---
layout: post
title: "My favorite unit testing framework: Cgreen"
date: 2016-2-13
---

It is difficult to overstate the value of test driven development
(TDD) for software development.  Of course we end up with a
comprehensive, fast, automated test suite for our software
project but the benefits of TDD often go much beyond that.
Oftentimes the design of the software component being developed
improves as a by-product.  TDD leads to more modular designs
because we are forced to write tests for each component in
isolation from other components.  Unit testing frameworks are
essential for deriving maximum value from TDD.  Good unit testing
frameworks allow us to write tests quickly with minimal
boilerplate, result in great error messages if a test fails, and
they allow us to run subsets of tests.  In several of my side
projects I've been using
[Cgreen](https://github.com/cgreen-devs/cgreen) as a unit testing
framework and it is quickly becoming my favorite tool for the
job.  In this post I'll outline some of the things I really like
about Cgreen.


## Cgreen is a plain C unit testing framework

First off Cgreen is a native plain C library.  Incidentally, that
happened to be the reason why I initially ran into Cgreen.  My
other two go-to testing frameworks,
[gtest](https://github.com/google/googletest) and
[boost unit test framework](http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/develop/libs/test/doc/html/index.html),
require C++.  Now, Cgreen can also be used for unit testing C++
projects, but the majority of my experience has been with plain C
projects.


## Very fast compile times

My favorite Cgreen feature is the speed with which I can rebuild
and rerun my test suites.  This is a pleasant change especially
compared to C++ unit testing frameworks that often have a large
header component.  Fast compile times are huge if you're doing
TDD.  You need to get feedback from your test suite as quickly as
possible.  Usually the goal is to be able to build and run the
test suite in less than a second, the faster the better.  For
example, rebuilding the entire test suite of
[beam laser](https://github.com/d-meiser/BeamLaser) takes about
0.6s on my ancient laptop.


## Great syntax for test specification

Most C++ unit testing frameworks (including gtest and boost unit
test) are in the tradition of jUnit.  Cgreen breaks with that
tradition.  It's syntax is heavily influenced by behavior driven
design (BDD).  As such, it has a true focus on making it so that
the test read like a natural language specification.

As an example, consider the following excerpt from the test suite
for ensembles of particles in BeamLaser:

{% highlight c %}
#include <cgreen/cgreen.h>
#include <Ensemble.h>

static struct BLEnsemble ensemble;

Describe(Ensemble)
BeforeEach(Ensemble) {}
AfterEach(Ensemble) {}

Ensure(Ensemble, initiallyHasZeroSize) {
  blEnsembleInitialize(10, 4, &ensemble);
  assert_that(ensemble.numPtcls, is_equal_to(0));
  blEnsembleFree(&ensemble);
}
{% endhighlight %}

The `Describe` line introduces the subject under test.  Behind
the scenes, this creates a test context with which the `Ensemble`
unit tests can be registered.  The `BeforeEach` and `AfterEach`
lines define code that is to be executed at the beginning and end
of each unit test.  This is similar to the setup and teardown
methods of fixtures in jUnit style testing frameworks.  Next we
have a unit test, `Ensure(Ensemble, initiallyHasZeroSize)`.  Note
how natural the test specification reads:
`assert_that(ensemble.numPtcls, is_equal_to(0))`.

Check out the
[cgreen documentation](http://cgreen-devs.github.io/) for more
examples of Cgreen test cases.  The documentation also explains
how to use other advanced features like mocks.

The beautiful syntax for test specification goes along with great
error reporting in case something goes wrong.  For example, if we
change the `is_equal_to(0)` in the test example to
`is_equal_to(1)` to artificially break the test we get the
following output:

```
Running "main" (4 tests)...
/home/scratch/BeamLaser/tests/testEnsemble.c:12: Failure: initiallyHasZeroSize 
	Expected [ensemble.numPtcls] to [equal] [1]
		actual value:			[0]
		expected value:			[1]

Completed "main": 2 passes, 1 failure, 0 exceptions in 17ms.
```
The error report contains all the information we need to debug
this test failure.


## Each test case is run in a separate process

By default, Cgreen forks a process for each test case.  This way,
test cases run in complete isolation from one another.  One of
them crashing does not affect the remaining tests or the test
runner.

To be honest, sometimes this can be a bit of a problem, too.  For
example, this behavior can get in the way when you're trying to
run your tests in a debugger.  If you're setting a breakpoint in
one of the test cases you'll be surprised to see that the
debugger never stops at that breakpoint because that happens in a
different process.  A process that the debugger isn't attached
to.

An enhancement is in the pipeline where you can disable forking
of new processes for test cases.


## Responsive developer community

The lead developers of Cgreen are super friendly and helpful.
When I first started using Cgreen, Matt spend an hour pair
programming with me to show me the ropes.  That despite the fact
that we had never met before.  The Cgreen developers respond
quickly to bug reports or feature requests.  There is a user's
mailing list on sourceforge but in my experience you'll get a
response more quickly if you open a ticket on github.


## Links

- [cgreen github repo](https://github.com/cgreen-devs/cgreen)
- [cgreen documentation](http://cgreen-devs.github.io/)
