---
layout: post
title: "It's difficult to wrap your head around 18 significant digits"
date: 2017-3-12
---
<script type="text/javascript" src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>

Over the years I've had the opportunity to collaborate with clock researchers on
a few occasions. These folks now build clocks with a stability approaching one
part in <span>\(10^{18}\)</span>. This means that on average the clock "ticks" $10^{18}$ times
before it misses a beat. The number $10^{18}$ is $1 000 000 000 000 000 000$, a
one followed by 18 zeros. It is a billion billions.

It's not uncommon for physics research concepts to be difficult to explain to
family and friends without a physics background. Numbers can be really large or
really small. And this is one of those cases where the sheer size of a number
makes it challenging to convey what the number means. Sometimes I like to play
this game where I try to come up with every day life analogies that illustrate
the size of a number and here is an example.

A large number that many people are at least aware of is the national debt. Last
I checked the national debt was just shy of 20 trillion dollars. That's a 2
followed by thirteen zeros. Let's try and develop some intuition for this
number. And then will see if we can use that intuition to get some understanding
of $10^{18}$.

Let's assume that we are putting every single American from a one day old baby
to a 100 year old senior to work to pay off the national debt. Somehow we find
somebody (China?) to pay each one of us $30 per hour. How long would we have to
work collectively to pay off the debt, assuming that we don't need to pay for
anything else during that time?

Well there's about 320 Million Americans. With our assumed pay rate we're making
approximately $10 billion per hour. Not bad! With that income it would take us
about 2000 hours to pay off all of the national debt. A year full time. That's
not horrible.

So we've got a good feel for $20 000 000 000 000$ (except that it's kind of hard
to visualize 320 Million people but let's assume we could do that). Can we use
that to understand $10^18$? If our national debt was $\$10^{18}$ the entire
population of the United States would have to work for $50 000$ years to pay it
off. Assuming we don't need to spend any money on anything else. That is almost
a thousand lifetimes of misery for the all of us. No thanks!

By the way I should mention that this whole exercise is a bit of a cheat because
I'm comparing a dimensionless number with a dimensional number (dollars or
time). But making this more correct would clutter up the whole story. Given the
premise outlined above we'd have to ask something like "How many times two
minutes would we have to work collectively to pay off the national debt?" Yeah,
like I said, it gets clumsy.

So yes, still no good intuition for $10^{18}$. It's obscenely large.
