---
layout: post
title: "Trip report for attempt at riding my bike from Denver to Seattle"
date: 2018-9-24
---

For some time I've wanted to do a longer bike packing trip. An
opportunity for just such a trip arose when it became apparent
that I'd have some time between two jobs this September. The
route I settled on was going to take me from Denver to Seattle.
From my home in Broomfield via Laramie, Rawlins, and Lander to
the Yellowstone and Grand Teton area. From there I'd take a more
Southerly route via Boise, Idaho or a more Northerly route via
Western Montana and Eastern Washington depending on conditions.
All in all about 1400 to 1500 miles.

There were difficulties before the tour even began. For one
thing, my job change requires me to relocate from Colorado to
Washington. Therefore there were many things to organize and to
take care of. By the time I had things in good enough shape where
I felt comfortable with being mostly off the grid for an extended
period of time I had a mere 11 days left for the ride. This meant
a daunting 130 to 140 miles per day. Every day. No rest days.
Come rain or come shine. Head wind or tail wind.

In addition, I would be starting my journey rather late in mid
September and temperatures higher up and further North could be
unpleasantly cold.

Nevertheless I decided to give it a go. Worst case scenario I'd
have to bail from somewhere along the way but I'd still have a
very fun adventure.

So things were intense leading up to the trip. Lots of phone calls
with property managers in Colorado and Washington, orchestrating
the transportation of my belongings, meeting with many good
friends to say my farewells in case there wouldn't be an
opportunity after the trip, and getting my gear in order for the
trip.


# Preparation

Monday, September 17, I finally was able to gather all the parts
needed to build a front wheel with dynohub along with head and
tail light. This required some frantic bike rides to several
shops to source the right length spokes. Community Cycles wasn't
open that day. Hence no access to a truing stand or spoke
tensionometer. So I laced the wheel in my kitchen, trued it on
the bike with a bush league ruler setup, adjusted spoke tension by
ear, and hoped for the best.

Between trips to shops, building the wheel, installing the
lighting system, packing, and having Dinner with Sarah it got
pretty late that night.


# Gear

My gear selection was founded on the theory that in order to have
any chance of making it on the aggressive schedule I'd have to go
as fast and light as possible. There was no point in bringing
significant camping equipment, such as a tent, because if that
was needed, e.g. to wait out a bad weather day, I'd be dead in
the water anyways. There would be virtually no margin for error
or delays.

The center of my setup was the 1987 Bianchi Volpe frame I'd
previously used for a section of the Colorado Route. This bike is
best described as a
light-tourer-with-some-cross-capability-do-everything-bike.
Compared to the Colorado Route trip I was hoping to need less
capacity for water. Therefore I would be able to use the front
fork cargo cages for camping gear (thermarest, sleeping bag, and
bivy sack) and some spare clothes. For a sleeping bag I went with
the Summerlite by Western Mountaineering to save weight and bulk.
I used the 9l Revelate Designs frame bag that has worked well for
me on several previous trips.

Other modifications to the bike since the Colorado Route trip
include:

* Shutter Precision PD 8 dynohub with Busch and Muller head and
  tail lights. I needed to be able to cover some miles in the
  dark.
* Wald basked on Nitto M12 front rack for items that I needed
  frequent access to and food and snacks.
* Fenders. I needed to be able to ride on days with less than
  ideal weather.

Overall I was pretty happy with my gear choices.


# Day 1

<p align="center">
<img src={{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day1.png" | absolute_url }} alt="Day 1 segment" width="600"/>
</p>

I left my house at 6:30am on Tuesday, September 18. My goal was
to make it to a point along US 287 somewhere past Laramie towards
Rawlins. It was mostly an uneventful ride. Brutally hot though.
Consumed about 1.5 gallons of water. I stopped at JAX in Fort
Collins to grab some last minute gear items and at Safeway in
Laramie to refuel. Reached a camp spot off the highway around
8:30pm. The dyno powered lights worked very well. There were lots
of mice that kept me from getting much sleep.


# Day 2

![Day 2 segment]({{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day2.png" | absolute_url }} =600x)

Left camp around 5:30am. Ran out of paved road at Walcott where
US 287 reconnects with I-80. Took a dirt road to the North West
through some hogbacks that shortly turned to gravel, then to
sand, then to desert before reaching the ghost town of Fort
Steel. Some tedious biking and time consuming hiking along this
stretch.

From Fort Steel I took I-80 past Sinclair to Rawlins and arrived
there around 12:30pm. Talked to a couple of chaps that were on
day 28 of their tour on the Great Divide Trail. Had just finished
the Great Basin and were going South. From Rawlins I headed North
using US 287 through the gas station of Muddy Gap, about 40 miles
from Rawlins, and then another 80 miles to Lander.

By the time I got to Muddy Gap around 4pm the weather was
changing and I was getting worried. Over the Wind River Range to
the West it was looking windy with dark snowy clouds. It was
getting noticeably colder. It felt like a late fall day in the
dessert where temperatures are nice in the sun but as soon as
you're in the shade or there is a breeze it gets cold quickly. I
resolved to push on to Lander where I'd be able to check the
weather forecast and to decide how to proceed once I was there.
With a good tailwind I covered the 80 miles in 5 hours and
crashed at the City Park in Lander (legal free camping!) around
9:30pm. I managed around 220 miles that day.


# Day 3

![Day 3 segment]({{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day3.png" | absolute_url }} =600x)

The forecast looked not great from here on out. Sub freezing
nighttime temperatures with wide spread frost in the mornings and
consistent West winds (head wind) of more than 20mph. In fact,
the wind was apparently bad enough that NOAA showed red hazardous
conditions for the next 2.5 days.

I was intimidated but felt good physically so I decided to keep
going and to just see what happens. The first 40 miles went
reasonably well albeit with a stiff side wind straight from the
West. As soon as I turned onto US 24 to head West towards Dubois
and ultimately Yellowstone, this wind became a real problem.
Consistent with the forecast, I'd guess that it was somewhere in
the 20s mph range. But there were extended stretches where the
wind was squeezing through gaps in the Canyon leading up to the
Continental Divide where the wind speeds were higher.

The remaining 30 miles to Dubois were very painful. It took me
about five hours and most of that time I was in the drops,
working very hard to make barely more than hiking speed. Gearing
never higher than 38/18 and a long stretches of 38/24. It was
also cold. I was wind chilled the entire time while wearing
almost all my clothes except for a down jacket.

After a 30 minute lunch break at Super Foods in Dubois I decided
to point my bike East and head back to Lander. It was a bit of a
spur of the moment decision. I'm sure the pain and exhausting of
that day played a big part in it. But the bigger picture was
objectively not looking good. I could not hope to make more than
another 30 miles of progress that day. And probably
significantly less than 100 miles on the following two days. At
that point I'd be in a pretty hole time and distance wise. And
I'd have to really exert myself to even make it that far. A
couple of tourers coming down from Moran told me that it had been
storming up there the last couple of days with good amounts of
precipitation. Rain during the day and snow during the night.
Frost in the morning.

So while I'm sure that some people would have been able to press
on and some would have been able to finish on the schedule I had
allowed myself I believe that I made the right decision for
myself and I'm happy with it. Of course it was very disappointing
and upsetting at the time.

It was remarkable to observe the changes that the decision to
turn around brought within me. Up until that point the whole ride
had been a rather desperate race against the clock. Any delays
were painful and I was unable to notice much of the landscape
that was floating past me much less enjoy it. Now I was able to
soak in the amazing views of the Northern Wind River region and
to truly enjoy riding. I was looking forward to the rest of my
journey back. The road no longer consisted just of an endless
stream of mile markers that had to be passed as efficiently as
possible.

I got back to Lander around 8 pm and camped again at the City
Park. I was happy.


# Day 4

![Day 4 segment]({{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day4.png" | absolute_url }} =600x)

This morning was very cold. Frost on the grass everywhere. It was
difficult to get motivated to peel myself out of the sleeping
bag, put on bike shorts, get on my bike and get going. I finally
hit the road around 7am. I didn't take off my down jacket until
around 10:30 despite pedalling hard.

It was a long way to Muddy Gap. 80 miles with consistent side
wind that required leaning into. Then another 40 odd miles to
Rawlins. I checked in at the Econolodge to dry out my sleeping
bag and to do some laundry in the sink.


# Day 5

![Day 5 segment]({{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day5.png" | absolute_url }} =600x)

I decided to return home via Walden and Poudre Canyon. It was a
very scenic ride from Wyoming into the North Park area in
Colorado. There were beautiful fall colors. A couple of
significant looking wild fires were raging West of Walden.

I continued about 20 miles past Walden on Highway 14 to make the
rest of the return trip feasible in one more day. At this point I
was struggling to cover the distance I had done on the first two
days on the way out in three days. It was close to 400 miles from
Lander to Broomfield via this route. I was hungry most of the
time and was not feeling very strong most of the time.

I had the worst dinner of the trip. Half a loaf of Hostess
Classic Wheat "bread" with eighth servings of Oscar Meyer salami.
That stuff is made of 98% pink slime with a few specks of pig
hoof I'm sure. But it's got a few hundred percent of your daily
sodium! So works for me. Also it was unpleasantly cold that
night probably because my camp was slightly above 8000ft.


# Day 6

![Day 6 segment]({{ "assets/denver_to_seattle_attempt/map_day6.png" | absolute_url }} =600x)

Next morning I climbed the remaining 2000ft to the top of Cameron
pass. Then 70 or so miles of descending Poudre Canyon to Laporte.
Most of it without a shoulder. Scary amount of traffic with lots
of trailers and lots of noobs who think it's perfectly fine to
coast alongside you for a minute or two down a narrow, winding
canyon road. Most terrifying part of the ride by far.

I felt rather tired for the remainder of the trip from Fort
Collins back home to Broomfield. I stopped at a couple of gas
stations to jolt some highly processed sugars into my system and
that helped a bit. The gas station hot dogs thrown in for good
measure felt like health food in comparison.

I got home around 6pm.


# Lessons learned

* On a trip of this length I'd prefer to have room for rest days.
  Either to wait out bad weather or to just recover mentally or
  physically. Not having any breathing room makes for a very
  stressful trip.
* I might have to go heavier for trips that cover a lot of
  North/South distance or a lot of different elevations.
  Temperature variations can be significant.
* Might need a tent, especially if you're planning to wait out
  some weather.
* Four weeks earlier might have been better.
* Wyoming is windy and sparse. Most of the towns shown on the map
  are no longer inhabited.
* I might have to research more sustainable food options for a
  trip of this length. Just carbs and highly processed ones at
  that did not feel good after three days. This, too, would
  probably make for more weight.
* The Brooks Champion Flyer is a great saddle.
* The Nitto B135 is a good touring handlebar. I especially liked
  it when I had to spend a lot of time in the drops due to head
  wind. I think there is room for improvement though. Mine is
  only 42cm wide and I feel that's too narrow. Not much room on
  the flats at all but I haven't been able to find it in any
  wider options. I think I'd like to give the Nitto Noodle a try,
  perhaps 46cm wide.
* Schwalbe Marathon Green Guard is an amazing tire. Roles well,
  feels supple and comfortable, and is tough as nails. I pulled a
  thread of a steel cable out of the rear tire. No idea how deep it
  was in there but it was in there. No puncture. Rolling over about
  a hundred miles of sharp loose gravel, sometimes at very high
  speed. Never any problems. 
* Dynohub with lights worked very well. Big improvement over
  battery powered lights in terms of beam shape, useful
  brightness, and visibility. Didn't notice any increase in
  rolling resistance and was running the lights at all times even
  during the day.


# Stats

Day 1: 147 miles, 5,121 feet of gain<br/>
Day 2: 221 miles, 5,820 feet of gain<br/>
Day 3: 154 miles, 4,500 feet of gain<br/>
Day 4: 126 miles, 5,115 feet of gain<br/>
Day 5: 118 miles, 4,275 feet of gain<br/>
Day 6: 150 miles, 3,809 feet of gain<br/>
Total: 916 miles, 28,640 feet of gain<br/>

