---
layout: post
title: "Sending a photo to a different state in under 24 hours"
date: 2018-10-21
---

Ok, this is going to make me appear very old: I once was blown
away by the fact that it is possible to send a photograph to a
different state in under 24 hours.  Sarah and I were going to a
wedding. And I had bought a pair of pants, shoes, and shirt for
the occasion. But I wasn't sure if the outfit I had picked out
was going to cut it. I needed Sarah to sign off on my outfit.

The problem was that I was living in Tucson, Arizona at the time
and Sarah was living in Boulder, Colorado.

You young wipper snappers are probably thinking "So? Why didn't
you just use skype? Or google hangouts? Facetime? Facebook
Messenger? Or any other video call app?"

The problem is that this was 2003 and none of those technologies
existed back then. Smart phones hadn't even been invented yet.
Almost nobody had a digital camera. I didn't have one until late
in 2006.

So this is how I did it. I loaded a roll of Fuji Superia 200 into
my super slick Canon Canonet QL 17 and mounted it on a tripod. It
was in the evening and pretty dark in my room and the sensitivity
of film is such that it would not have been possible to take a
picture with just the ceiling light. Thank god I also had the
flash unit for the QL 17 and a pair of AA batteries. So I filled
the roll of 24 frames striking poses in front of the tripod
mounted camera.  Then I went to sleep. There was nothing else I
could do that night.

Next morning I stopped at the photo store just off the University
of Arizona campus on my way to work. They were offering one hour
film development. And the kicker was that they had the ability to
scan your film into a computer and make a CD with jpgs. How crazy
was that? Of course you had to pay extra for that.  But anyways I
dropped off the film and went to work.

Then, at lunch time, I stopped at the photo shop to pick up the
developed film and the CD with jpgs. In our office (the old room
300 actually, aka the room that does not exist, aka the
Gedankenlab) we had a workstation that had a CD drive. I popped
in the CD and used some command line tool (forgot its name) to
look at the pictures one by one. I picked one and copied it to my
home directory. That's right, just one. At a resolution of a
little over 1 megapixel the pictures were several 100 kilobyte in
size. That was huge and there was no way to send much more than
that to Sarah. Flicker, picasa or any picture posting site like
that also didn't exist yet.

Once I had the picture in my NFS mounted home directory I could
use a different computer from which we had internet access to
email the picture to Sarah. I then called her lab (landline!) to
let her know that I had sent that email to her. In those days you
were offline by default.  High tech folks like us checked email
maybe a few times a day.  But you had to actively go and log in
somewhere.

From taking the pictures to her giving the thumbs up on my outfit
it only took about 15 hours. Magic!



