---
layout: post
title: "French Direct"
date: 2018-12-09
---

We arrive at high camp late in the afternoon. The climbing has been more
challenging than we had expected. And in the shade it was cold.

Now we are on the glacier in the sun below the route. Several groups are camped
with us. One climbed the peak earlier in the day and is packing up to descend.

It is late in the day and we are tired from the climb. And our nerves are worn
out, too. So we decide to postpone the summit attempt by one day.

The next day we rest. It is hot in the tent and bearable outside. Sometimes we
push aside the air matraces to cool off on the glacier. Cooking lunch. And
always the route is above us. Large ice blocks near the top look like they
might come crashing down at any time.

The sun sets a second time. This time for a short night. At two in the morning
we wake up and make tea and eat breakfast. Then we stumble out of camp toward
the start of the route. Before it gets steep I stop to pee and I think I miss
the team's prayer in the process. When I rejoin the others we rope up.
Wallowing up the slope in deep snow that has slid off the face. We reach the
big bergschrund one full ropes length up and we reconvene. Two more ropes
lengths of simulclimbing in snow then the ground turns to ice. It is still
nearly completely dark.

The steepness of the ice feels surprising and unsettling at first. I half
expect to slip with every step. Way too much hacking at the slopes. I spend a
lot of energy. I forget how many screws we had in each rope team but the runout
does not feel overwhelming. Both teams clip to the same screws and we belay off
shared anchors. We settle into a rhythm. Confidence building that we can
actually perhaps do this. Maybe. I have climbed so little ice that my technique
changes and improves throughout the climb. It is not very cold. Just at the end
of each belay you are anxious to get going again.

The sun rises. Slowly but it fills us with more confidence. We are working our
way up. Slowly one ropes length at a time. But now it is a race against the
clock. The big ice blocks near the ridge crest are catching sun. They are
getting weaker every minute.

By the time there's just one more pitch to go the route is nearly vertical and
deeply inset. I am very tired now but leaning into the walls on either side of
the runnel I am able to make upward progress using a half stemming technique.
Water melts on my pants and then refreezes when I lean into the walls.

Then I reach the top of the ridge. The snow and ice cornice that forms the
ridge is so thin that you can see the far side shining through the snow. Two
Italians had broken through it the year before and fallen to their death on the
other side. I reinforce an anchor a previous party had built with stakes and a
screw. Before long three of us are suspended off this anchor in a half hanging
belay. We are nervous and uncomfortable. I make the leader on the other rope
bypass us to climb to the very top. The logistics get very complicated. But one
after the other we make it to the top. The ropes are very tangled and it takes
us a long time to sort them out. More time for the ceracs to soften.

The descend is very fast. Many long rapells. The ropes slide down quickly over
the snow and ice. We find many existing anchors. Then we cross the bergschrund
the ground becomes less steep. We sit on our packs and wait for the other team
to join us before we stumble back to camp.

